update to more closely match schedule v3 PR (#5)
alice-i-cecile/rfcs: rfcs/45-stageless.md

## Summary

> Bevy's current scheduling architecture (as of 0.7) has a large number of issues due to internal complexity. Certain concepts and behaviors are unnecessarily fused together and certain building blocks—stages, run criteria, states—are presented as independent but actually have significant internal coupling. These properties frequently lead users into encounters with unexpected side effects and indecipherable errors.

Reviewer: Line break each sentence for clean commits please.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bevy's current scheduling architecture (as of 0.7) has a large number of issues due to internal complexity.
Certain concepts and behaviors are unnecessarily fused together and certain building blocks—stages, run criteria, states—are presented as independent but actually have significant internal coupling.
These properties frequently lead users into encounters with unexpected side effects and indecipherable errors.
```

It's become a tangled mess.

This is a holistic redesign that decouples system storage from system scheduling, makes system labels more useful, slims down the app builder API, leverages exclusive systems to handle complex control flow (gives a clear purpose to everything in general), and more.

## Motivation

The fundamental challenges with the current stage-centered scheduling model are [numerous](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/discussions/2801).
Of particular note:

- Stages entangle ordering and command processing.

> - Plugin authors have no nicer way to export their systems than wrapping them in stages, but imported stages can't be scheduled by the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Plugin authors have no tools to export their systems other than wrapping them in stages, but the scheduling of imported stages can't be controlled by the user.
```

> - Nothing can have multiple run criteria.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Systems and system sets cannot have multiple run criteria.
```

- There's no clear pattern for users to architect turn-based games.
- There's no clear pattern for users to make a state "span across" multiple stages with our state machine model.
- Our state machine model (a stack) doesn't enable enough use cases to warrant its complexity.

> - There are just too many types and methods. (looking at you, "`.add_system_to_startup_stage`")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- There are just too many types and methods. (looking at you, "`.add_system_set_to_startup_stage`")

```

Unfortunately, all of these problems are deeply interwoven. Despite our best efforts, fixing them incrementally at either the design or implementation stage is impossible, as it results in myopic architecture choices and terrible technical debt.

## User-facing explanation

### Scheduling terminology and overview

Let's define some terms so that hopefully we're all on the same page.

- **system**: a stateful instance of a function that accesses data stored in a world
- **system set**: a system label that represents a group of systems and other sub-sets
- **condition**: a special kind of system that guards the execution of a system (set)
- **dependency**: a system (set) that must complete before the system (set) of interest can run

> - **scheduler**: you

Reviewer: Very unclear.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **scheduler**: the programmer, who is attempting to control when and if systems run
```

> - **schedule** (verb): specify conditions and dependencies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **schedule** (verb): specify when and if a system runs
```

- **schedule** (noun): the executable form of a system set
- **executor**: executes a schedule on a world
- **"ready"**: when a system is no longer waiting for dependencies to complete
- **"complete"**: when a system has finished running or was skipped (because a condition didn't pass)
- **"incompatible"**: when two systems have conflicting access to some data (would be data race if they ran at the same time)

To build a Bevy app, users have to specify when their systems should run. By default, systems have no strict order nor conditions for execution. The process of specifying those is called **scheduling**. To make things more ergonomic, systems can be grouped into **system sets**, which can be ordered and conditioned in the same manner as systems. Furthermore, systems and system sets can be ordered together and grouped together *within larger sets*, which allows users to describe logical hierarchies.

In short, for any system or system set, users can:

- add execution order constraints relative to other systems or sets (i.e. "this system runs before A")
- add conditions that must be true for it to run (i.e. "this system only runs if a player has full health")

> - add it to sets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- add it to sets (which define common behavior for all systems within that set)
```

> These properties are all additive. Adding another does not replace an existing one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These properties are all additive.
Adding another does not replace an existing one, and they cannot be removed.
```

        )
        // multiple systems and sets can be added at once
        .add_many(
          // there are macros available for describing a linear sequence of systems and sets
          chain![
            GameSet::SubMenu,
            // process commands using a dedicated system
            apply_buffers.named("FlushMenu"),
          ]
          // configure all nodes in the chain at once
          .in_set(GameSet::Menu)
          .after(some_system)
        )
        /* ... */
        .run();
}
```

### Configuring run order

The simplest way users can configure systems is by saying *when* they should run using the `.before`, `.after`, and `.in_set` methods. These constraints are relative to another system or set. Run order constraints involving sets are eventually flattened into constraints between the individual systems. Any constraints the user specifies are used to derive dependency graphs, which (along with the data access) tells the engine where systems can run in parallel. The only limit is that every graph must be **solvable**. If any relationship constraint cannot be met (e.g. A was configured to run both before and after system B), it will result in an error.

> Bevy provides the `App::add_many` method for configuring multiple systems and sets at once. Using `nodes![a, b, c, ...].chain()` (or the `chain![a, b, c, ...]` shortcut) will create dependencies between the successive elements. (Note: This is different from "system chaining" in Bevy 0.7 and earlier. That concept has been renamed to "system piping" to avoid overlap.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bevy provides the `App::add_many` method for configuring multiple systems and sets at once. Using `nodes![a, b, c, ...].chain()` (or the `chain![a, b, c, ...]` shortcut) will create dependencies between the successive elements.
(Note: This is different from "system chaining" in Bevy 0.7 and earlier. That concept has been renamed to "system piping" to avoid overlap.)
```

```rust
fn main() {
    App::new()
        .add_many(chain![compute_damage, deal_damage, check_for_death].in_set(GameSet::Combat))
        .run()
}
```

> A standard Bevy app will have built-in system sets, provided by either the `MinimalPlugins` or the `DefaultPlugins`. In those apps, if no set is specified, then by default systems and sets are added to `CoreSet::Update`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A standard Bevy app will have built-in system sets, provided by either `MinimalPlugins` or `DefaultPlugins`.
In those apps, if no set is specified, then by default systems and sets are added to `CoreSet::Update`.
```

```rust
#[derive(SystemLabel)]
enum Physics {
    ComputeForces,
    DetectCollisions,
    HandleCollisions,
}

impl Plugin for PhysicsPlugin {
    fn build(app: &mut App){
        // Scheduling configs are reusable.
        let mut shared_config = Config::new()
            // Built-in fixed update set (replaces FixedTimestep).
            .in_set(CoreSet::FixedUpdate)
            .after(InputSet::ReadInputHandling);

        app
            .add_set(Physics::ComputeForces.configure_with(shared_config).before(Physics::DetectCollisions))
            .add_set(Physics::DetectCollisions.configure_with(shared_config).before(Physics::HandleCollisions))
            .add_set(Physics::HandleCollisions.configure_with(shared_config))
            .add_system(gravity.in_set(Physics::ComputeForces))
            .add_many(chain![broad_pass, narrow_pass, solve_constraints].in_set(Physics::DetectCollisions))
            .add_system(collision_damage.in_set(Physics::HandleCollisions));
    }
}
```

### Configuring run conditions (run criteria)

> While ordering constraints determine *when* a system runs, **run conditions** determine *if* it runs at all. Run conditions consist of systems that have read-only data access and return `bool`. A system or set can have any number of conditions, and it will only run if all of them return `true`. If any condition returns `false`, the system (or systems under the set) will be skipped.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While ordering constraints determine *when* a system runs, **run conditions** determine *if* it runs at all. Run conditions consist of systems that have read-only data access and return `bool`.
A system or set can have any number of conditions, and it will only run if all of them return `true`. 
If any condition returns `false`, the system (or systems under the set) will be skipped.
```

> Conditions are each evaluated *at most once* during a single pass of a schedule. The evaluation occurs literally just before the system (or the first system encountered that is part of the set of interest) would be run. Because of this, results are guaranteed to be up-to-date. The state read by the conditions cannot be modified in an observable way before the guarded system starts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Conditions are each evaluated *at most once* during a single pass of a schedule.
The evaluation occurs just before the system (or the first system encountered that is part of the set of interest) would be run.
Because of this, results are guaranteed to be up-to-date. The state read by the conditions cannot be modified in an observable way before the guarded system starts.
```

        .add_system(system_meltdown_mitigation.run_if(too_many_enemies))
        // We can use closures for simple one-off conditions, 
        // which automatically fetch the appropriate data from the `World`.
        .add_system(spawn_more_enemies.run_if(|difficulty: Res<Difficulty>| difficulty >= 9000))
        // The `resource_exists` and `resource_equals` helper functions for generating
        // simple conditions (well, closures that convert into conditions).
        .add_system(gravity.run_if(resource_exists(Gravity)))
        // Conditions can be attached to system sets, so you can skip the whole set.
        .add_set(GameSet::Physics.run_if(resource_equals(Paused(false))))
        .run();
}
```

### Running scheduled systems

The systems, sets, and scheduling data added to an `App` is stored on the `World` in the `SystemRegistry` resource. This resource is also responsible for generating and maintaining the dependency graphs for the stored system sets.

In order to run a system or system set on the `World`, the system(s) must be extracted from the `SystemRegistry`. (This lets the `SystemRegistry` remain accessible by the running systems).

> To do that, the `SystemRegistry` has methods to export a system or schedule given a label. A **schedule** is an executable version of a system set, containing all the systems and conditions, as well as some metadata for an **executor** to run those in the correct order (efficiently). After the schedule has been run, it can be returned to the `SystemRegistry` using another method. This is the same process the default `App` runner uses to execute the startup sequence and main update loop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do that, the `SystemRegistry` has methods to export a system or schedule given a label.
A **schedule** is an executable version of a system set, containing all the systems and conditions, as well as some metadata for an **executor** to run those in the correct order (efficiently).
After the schedule has been run, it can be returned to the `SystemRegistry` using another method.
This is the same process the default `App` runner uses to execute the startup sequence and main update loop.
```

### Command processing

> Commands are arbitrary world modifications that are most commonly used to spawn or despawn entities and add or remove components. Since those types of changes have unpredictable side effects on stored component data, commands are deferred until the next scheduled `apply_buffers` exclusive system runs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Commands are arbitrary world modifications that are most commonly used to spawn or despawn entities and add or remove components.
Since those types of changes have unpredictable side effects on stored component data, commands are deferred until the next scheduled `apply_buffers` exclusive system runs.
```

```rust
use bevy::prelude::*;

struct ProjectilePlugin;

impl Plugin for ProjectilePlugin {
    fn build(app: &mut App) {
        app
        .add_system(spawn_projectiles.before(CoreSystem::FlushPostUpdate))
        .add_many(
            chain![
                check_if_projectiles_hit,
                despawn_projectiles_that_hit,
                // Wherever you want to sync and apply commands, insert an instance of `apply_buffers`.
                apply_buffers.named("FlushProjectiles")
                fork_projectiles,
            ]
            .after(CoreSystem::FlushPostUpdate)
            .before(CoreSystem::FlushLast)
        )
    }
}
```

### Exclusive systems and control flow

Exclusive systems come in handy when users find themselves in need of something more complex than "each system runs once per schedule pass".

> In those cases, you can **create an `&mut World` context like an exclusive system or command and run a schedule inside it.** You're free to extract any schedule available in the `SystemRegistry` resource and run it on the world.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In those cases, you can **create an `&mut World` context like an exclusive system or command and run a schedule inside it.**
You're free to extract any schedule available in the `SystemRegistry` resource and run it on the world.
```

### States

**Finite-state machines** allow ad-hoc execution of logic in response to state transitions. Typically, FSMs are used for relatively complex, high-level facets of an app like pausing, opening menus, and loading assets. FSMs are stored as individual resources and their state types must implement the `State` trait. State types are most often enums (or nested enums), where each enum variant represents a different state.

Each state has two associated system sets: an **on-enter** set that runs when the state is entered, and an **on-exit** set that runs when the state is exited. Neither set is part of another set.

```rust
fn main() {
    App::new()
        /* ... */
        .add_system(load_map.in_set(OnEnter(GameState::Playing)))
        .add_system(autosave.in_set(OnExit(GameState::Playing)))
        /* ... */
        .run();
}
```

You can queue a state transition by getting a mutable reference to the state machine resource (`ResMut<Fsm<S>>`) and then using the `Fsm::queue_transition` method within your system.

> Since state transitions can be as open-ended as commands, they're deferred (just like commands) until the next execution of an `apply_state_transition<S: State>` exclusive system. This system first extracts the FSM using `World::resource_scope`, next runs the "on-exit" schedule of the current state, then runs the "on-enter" schedule of the queued state, and finally updates the FSM's state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since state transitions can be as open-ended as commands, they're deferred in a similar fashion until the next execution of an `apply_state_transition<S: State>` exclusive system.
This system first extracts the FSM using `World::resource_scope`, next runs the "on-exit" schedule of the current state, then runs the "on-enter" schedule of the queued state, and finally updates the FSM's state.
```

> Note that commands are not automatically processed in or between those steps. Add instances of the `apply_buffers` system to one or both sets if that is required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that commands are not automatically processed in or between those steps.
Add instances of the `apply_buffers` system to one or both sets if that is required.
```

- Executor
  - Defer task creation until we know a system can and should run.
- States
  - Add `State` trait and derive macro.
  - Add finite-state machine resource type.
  - Add `OnEnter<S: State>(S)` and `OnExit<S: State>(S)` types and impl `SystemLabel` for them.
  - Add `apply_state_transition::<S: State>` exclusive system that will run the transition sets.
  - Add sugar:
    - Add `.add_states` method (to `SystemRegistry` and `App`) that registers the "on-enter" and "on-exit" sets for multiple states.
    - Add `state_equals` function that generates an `IntoRunCondition`-compatible closure for checking "if active".
- Misc.
  - Rename "system chaining" to "system piping" so we can use "chain" to describe the macro/type that applies sequential ordering constraints.
- Port the rest of the engine and examples to the new API.

Given the massive scope, that sounds relatively straightforward!
However, doing so will break approximately the entire engine, and tests will not pass again until everything has been ported.

Let's explore some implementation details.

### Scheduling

> Systems and their scheduling information are bundled and stored. The actual dependency graph construction is deferred (which means scheduling methods are order-independent).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Systems and their scheduling information are bundled and stored.
The actual dependency graph construction is deferred (which means scheduling methods are order-independent).
```

Add instances of the `apply_buffers` system to one or both sets if that is required.

## Implementation strategy

Let's take a look at what implementing this would take:

- Scheduling
  - Delete `SystemSet`, `Stage`, `Schedule`, and `SystemContainer`.
  - Add `&mut World` as a `SystemParam`.
  - Delete all the special exclusive system types and traits.
  - Go full [builder syntax](https://github.com/bevyengine/rfcs/pull/31) on descriptors instead of adding more `App` methods.
    - Rename the `.label` method on `IntoSystemDescriptor` trait to `.in_set`.
    - Add method to import saved config.
    - Add equivalent `IntoSetDescriptor` trait for types that impl `SystemLabel`.
    - Add `.named` method on `IntoSystemDescriptor` so users can give systems unique instance names.
    - Add `Descriptor` enum that generalizes system and set descriptors (for bulk scheduling).
- Storage
  - Build the `SystemRegistry` type.
    - Add method to change which set is default (i.e. `CoreSet::Update`) if none are specified.
      - Need special-casing for sets which that not have a parent, like state transitions.
    - Add `.add_many` method and some macros for convenient bulk scheduling.

> - Run conditions (Run criteria)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Run conditions (previously run criteria)
```

    - Everybody is gonna need to port their apps to the new API.
    - Since they have more control, users will need to give more thought about when their systems should run.
2. It may become harder to understand an app schedule at a glance.
    - In particular, it may become harder to understand when commands are processed.
    - Better debugging and visualization tools become even more important (but easier to write).
    - Extra caution must be taken around systems that belong to multiple sets.
3. State transitions are no longer queued up in a stack.
    - This also removes "in-stack" and related system groups / logic.
    - With the simplified run criteria, the stack is trivial to re-implement, but preferably a third-party plugin does it.
    - The `apply_state_transition` system performs a single transition, doesn't do an endless cycle in one schedule pass.
4. States no longer have an "on update".
    - If a system must run on the same frame as the transition, it has to be in "on enter" and "on exit" (or your own DIY equivalent).

## Rationale and alternatives

### Why did you call them "sets" instead of "labels" or "categories"?

> The word "set" better describes what labeling actually means for scheduling. Sets aren't just an abstract tag, they have a "physical" location in the overall graph (a set is a "supernode" that encapsulates all the nodes inside it). Likewise, sets that intersect (share nodes) can't be made to depend on each other.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The word "set" better describes what labeling actually means for scheduling.
Sets aren't just an abstract tag, they have a "physical" location in the overall graph (a set is a "supernode" that encapsulates all the nodes inside it).
Likewise, sets that intersect (share nodes) can't be made to depend on each other.
```

### If users can configure system sets, can they mess with systems added by third-party plugins?

Yes, somewhat, and it's intentional.

> Not being able to schedule plugin systems is a source of [significant user pain](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/issues/2160). Instead of the current status quo, we thought a better pattern would be a plugin exporting its top-level set label (at the very least) and the user being responsible for deciding where to put it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not being able to schedule plugin systems is a source of [significant user pain](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/issues/2160).
Instead of the current status quo, we thought a better pattern would be a plugin exporting its top-level set label (at the very least) and the user being responsible for deciding where to put it.
```

> As it's now possible to define set hierarchies, plugin authors can decide exactly what they want to expose to users in their "public API" *and* still ensure any key logical invariants hold. Users will only be able schedule what the plugin author chooses to make public. Plugin authors could even make massive internal changes without breaking user apps (as long as the "public API" is relatively stable).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As it's now possible to define set hierarchies, plugin authors can decide exactly what they want to expose to users in their "public API" *and* still ensure any key logical invariants hold.
Users will only be able schedule what the plugin author chooses to make public.
Plugin authors could even make massive internal changes without breaking user apps (as long as the "public API" is relatively stable).
```

### Why is there no "on-update" system set for states?

> Conceptually, a set occupies some position in a schedule. However, simply being in a state does not. Any system anywhere can be conditioned to only run if a certain state is active. If there was a builtin "on-update" set, it could only exist in one place. That, along with it being trivial to create a set with the condition that a state must be active, gave little reason to do it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Conceptually, a set occupies some position in a schedule.
However, simply being in a state does not.
Any system anywhere can be conditioned to only run if a certain state is active.
If there was a builtin "on-update" set, it could only exist in one place.
That, along with it being trivial to create a set with the condition that a state must be active, gave little reason to do it.
```

```rust
fn main() {
    App::new()
        /* ... */
        .add_system(
            my_system
            // A state being active has no inherent position in the schedule.
            // Any system anywhere can be told to only run if a certain state is active.
            .in_set(CoreSet::PostUpdate)
            // This helper generates a condition that returns `true` if the FSM is currently `GameState::Playing`.
            .only_if(state_equals(GameState::Playing))
        )
        /* ... */
        .run();
    )
}
```

## Unresolved questions

### What sugar should we use for adding multiple systems at once?

Convenience methods like `add_many` are important for reducing boilerplate. For these methods, we need to be able to refer to collections of systems and system sets.

**In summary:**

> - builder syntax: marginal improvement every adding individual systems

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- builder syntax: marginal improvement over adding individual systems

```

        .with(compute_defense),
        .with(check_for_crits),
        .with(compute_damage),
        .with(deal_damage),
        .with(check_for_death)
        .chain()
        .in_set(GameSet::Combat)
    )

.add_many(Nodes::new().with(run).with(jump).after(InputSet::ReadInput))
```

- looks bad
  - not much better than adding things individually
  - confusing placement of brackets
  - no clear seperation between systems and the group config
- no limit to number of elements

#### Arrays

```rust
.add_many([
        compute_attack, 
        compute_defense,
        check_for_crits,
        compute_damage,
        deal_damage,
        check_for_death,
    ]
    .chain()
    .in_set(GameSet::Combat))

.add_many([run, jump].after(InputSet::ReadInput))
```

- looks pretty
- no limit to number of elements
- doesn't work (different functions are different types, arrays must be homogoneous)

#### Tuples

```rust
.add_many((
        compute_attack, 
        compute_defense,
        check_for_crits,
        compute_damage,
        deal_damage,
        check_for_death
    )
    .chain()
    .in_set(GameSet::Combat)
)

.add_many((run, jump).after(InputSet::ReadInput))
```

- looks pretty

> - limited to 12 elements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- limited to 12 elements
- increases compile times
```
